Gene metrics are calculated using multiple sources of data, as described in _The penetrance of rare variants in cardiomyopathy-associated genes: a cross-sectional approach to estimate penetrance for secondary findings_ (McGurk, et al., 2023)[link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10502871/]. The gene metrics were calculated comparing clinical referral data to UK Biobank data.


Case excess
 
Case excess refers to the prevalence of rare variation in a gene in a cohort of patients with a particular disease over and above the prevalence in a control or reference population cohort. This is an estimate of the proportion of cases attributable to variants in that gene.  It is defined as: proportion of cases with a rare variant in a gene - proportion of controls/reference samples with a rare variant. For most genes with a valid association to Mendelian diseases like cardiomyopathies, a statistically significant excess of rare variants will be observed. While a lack of case excess does not necessarily preclude a gene from a pathogenic role in disease (genes may be very rare causes of disease with pathogenic variants limited to small regions of the gene), variants in these genes are likely to be uninterpretable without substantial evidence of segregation in the affected family and therefore of limited utility for clinical genetic testing.
 
Odds Ratios (OR) and Etiological Fractions (EF)
 
A comprehensive assessment of the level of rare variation across genes in the population (ExAC) and large case cohorts allows us to calculate metrics to evaluate the pathogencity of novel variants when detected in a proband. These are the Odds Ratio (OR) (ratio of odds of cardiomyopathy comparing rare variant carriers with non-carriers) and the Etiological Fraction (EF, a.k.a. attributable risk fraction among the exposed - an estimate of the proportion of cases in which the rare variant in a gene is causal). Values are calculated for truncating (frameshift, nonsense, canonical splice site) and non-truncating (missense, inframe indel) variants for each gene.
e.g. rare truncating variants in MYBPC3 have an OR of 119, and  an EF of 0.99 , whereas rare non-truncating variants in MYBPC3 have an OR of 5.7 and an EF of 0.82
This can be interpreted that when a rare truncating variant is found in MYBPC3 in a person with HCM, it is estimated to account for 99% of their disease risk, or 99% of such variants are pathogenic.
